so how to deal with an aggressive
teenager
addicted to video games right so this is
this is a good one right hey hi dr k um
i need advice on what to do with my
younger brother 17 he is autistic but
attends regular school with a decent
performance he didn't get any special
education but we made efforts to be
understanding for his difficulties
before the pandemic he was socially
inept but still had a good relationship
with us with the start of the pandemic
he got a phone and became addicted to
video games and his behavior changed
he locks himself in his room all day
barely eats yells loudly for hours on
end while playing pvp games he also uses
very foul language and often punches or
throws objects violently
his shouting doesn't stop at night and
he and doesn't allow anyone to sleep
parents and four siblings when
confronted about his behavior even by a
simple knock on the door to remind him
to lower his voice he goes into fits of
rage and blames it all on us
saying we should leave him alone until
he calms down which sometimes takes
hours to days which is an inconvenience
last year he ran away from home and
sometimes he threatens to do it again
when he puts down his video games he
becomes a little more open discussion
and promises to change and says he
understands the problem however a few
minutes later he goes back to video
games and forgets all of that and all
the shouting cursing disrespectful
speech resumes
my father gave up on him and doesn't
want to take him to a mental health
professional i am an unemployed college
student so i can't do that myself how
should i talk to my brother should i ask
for outside help
um
ps i'd be overjoyed if dr k saw this i
saw it but he did he
but if he didn't would appreciate any
advice i think you should check out the
advice in the thread as well uh thank
you to dr k and and thank you to the
wonderful community
so this is a hard one
so we get a lot of posts
about people asking what can i do in
this situation
and sometimes you know for parents and
stuff i think that there's a lot more
that they can do
but a lot of the posts that we get are
from like siblings
who are like you know hey my my you know
my younger brother or sister or whatever
has a problem what can i do to support
them we also get a lot of posts from
people like asking about friends right
they'll say oh my friend is struggling
with depression like
what can i do
what can i do my my friend or partner is
suicidal like i don't know how to
support them
we get a lot of requests for people
asking what can i do
in situations where
they're not really empowered to do much
so the first thing that you've got to do
if you're in a situation like this
is first of all recognize like what
you're empowered to do and what you're
not empowered to do
and this in and of itself is like
oftentimes a place that people get
tripped up because they want to do so
much right your desires you care about
your brother you really want to try hard
like the amount of energy or will
that you have to help him
is actually potentially outweighed by
what you're actually capable of
and we see this a lot in medicine right
so sometimes you know you'll see this
like i tend to think about things like
cancer where you know
people are willing to do everything
within their power they're willing to
take any medicine they're willing to do
this they're willing to do that you have
lots of doctors that are you know
willing to go above and beyond to try to
save this patient's life
and at the end of the day you just may
not be able to
so you can want something a lot
especially as a sibling you can care
about your brother you can love your
brother but one of the first things that
it's difficult to do is to accept that
you cannot fix this problem you can try
to help him by all means but you have to
start out of the gate recognizing that
like you know there's only so much you
can do as an older sibling who's
unemployed and in college and that's
your karma
that's not really up to you right you
can't magically be their parent
some
siblings will try right so some siblings
will get parentified once their parents
check out and they become responsible
for younger siblings
so ultimately the first thing and this
is where we also kind of come it comes
back to dharma and karma so what's your
dharma what's your duty in the situation
and what's your karma what are you
actually capable of what's your
circumstance
so i know it's kind of hard but the
first thing you've got to really do is
like think through those things like
what is your response what is the
responsibility
of an older sibling to a younger sibling
what's the responsibility of a 22 year
old to a 17 year old
first thing to think about and
furthermore what are you capable of
because you're gonna you're gonna beat
yourself up and you're gonna feel
ashamed of yourself and it's gonna be so
terrible like because you love your
brother so much and you want so much you
want to do so much for him but if you're
not able to you're going to just tear
yourself apart internally and you're
going to blame yourself which is not
going to help anyone
so that's the first thing is to
recognize basically i'm going to assume
that you have essentially no real power
in this situation like for example as
his older sibling you can't take away
his video games right like i'm assuming
you can't do that
um you're not you may not understand
health insurance or whatever i don't
know what country you're in but you may
not be able to take him to uh because
he's a minor so he's 17 so you may not
be able to take him to a medical doctor
or therapist because you're not his
guardian right so there are a lot of
things that you can't do which it sounds
like your brother needs
so let's get on to that
so the first thing is i'm so sorry that
your dad seems to have mentally checked
out and is unwilling to take him to see
a therapist because i i think
essentially what needs to happen in the
situation is that your parents need to
take responsibility and furthermore
they it's not their fault but like
they're probably not equipped to deal
with something like this
so this is where you know sometimes
we'll say hey like you guys should sign
up for coaching coaching can help with
with this when it comes to something
like this and even within our parent
coaching we have this issue where when
it comes to the intersection of autism
spectrum and addiction especially video
game addiction i really think that
having a a real mental health
professional involved is like really
what you need
so remember that autism spectrum has
such a constellation
of symptoms so we do see things like
emotions that get out of control very
quickly we do see less control over
addictive behaviors we see meltdowns
behavioral disturbances things like that
there are also different kinds of
communication problems so you know in
the worst cases we have
people on the autism spectrum that are
non-verbal and really don't communicate
at all
then we have people on the high
functioning autism that can go to school
and things like that and have
conversations but their internal ability
to become aware of their actions and
behaviors like maybe pretty low so
they'll make promises but as soon as the
game turns on like everything goes out
the window they're not like capable of
remembering the promise that they made
their mind can't remind them hey
remember we promised this thing
so this is where working with a
professional is so important because
ideally the professional will understand
and map out for the family
what the child can and can't handle
then ideally what you need to do is set
up a very strict
boundary plan around gaming usage
right and what i'm sort of hearing in
this situation is that there are
essentially no boundaries being set on
the child because
the child really flips out and so since
everyone is walking on eggshells around
the child
you're propagating a lot of bad behavior
that is getting worse and worse and no
one is putting a check on the bad
behavior so it's just going to grow out
of proportion right it's kind of like
you know if i have an ant mound in my
front yard and i don't do anything to
stop the ants the ant-man will keep
growing like it'll it'll be an
infestation if i've got termites in my
house and i don't do anything to stop
them it'll just keep growing
so behaviors will continue to grow or be
shaped by the video games until someone
sets some kind of limit
and this is where promises extracting a
promise from someone is not setting a
limit
so setting a limit is about having some
kind of behavioral consequence when a
certain kind of behavior happens
extracting a promise is insufficient
so this is what we see like back when i
worked in an addiction rehab you know
i'd have some patients who made lots of
promises for many years they're like
yeah i promise i'll quit drinking my
last drink i swear i'll never do it
again promise after promise after
promise for year after year after year
and they're not lying they're very
genuine in that moment right like they
really do believe it they're remorseful
month goes by three months go by six
months go by
and then kind of just sort of forget
right it's like making a new year's
resolution the day that you make a new
year's resolution i'm gonna cut out soda
for
2022 gg no more soda
you really mean it there's a lot of
motivation there right
just over time the mind is kind of
tricky it sort of forgets it kind of
yeah
a little bit every once in a while is
okay
like it doesn't matter like i'm eating
cookies anyway so like what's the
difference between cookies and soda like
if i'm gonna eat some sugar like
sometimes i just enjoy a soda more than
a cookie like there are all kinds of
rationalizations that you know
mine gets distracted you go back to the
behavior
so why do people show up at rehab
because their partner is like i'm a
divorce you i'm done with this
either you go
rehab or i'm done
so 30
of people that have been
the rough estimate okay i don't have
real data on this but i want to say that
30 percent of people that i took care of
or like patients at rehabs that i worked
at were undergoing a divorce or
separation there has to be a consequence
in order to drive the behavior
and the problem is if you're like 22
years old and you've got a 17 year old
like i don't know that you can drive
that consequence and if your parents are
mentally checked out i think you guys
it's a really hard uphill battle i don't
think you're going to be able to fix it
on your own bluntly
so i i mean this is what we do in parent
coaching is we'll help parents
work with their children with autism and
set limits
and even then especially in the cases of
autism we also recommend
real mental health professional mental
health help specifically because when it
comes to autism it's such a
heterogeneous manifestation that there
isn't like a playbook for autism if any
of you all have autism or you have a
family member with autism you understand
that there's no playbook for autism
autism in and of itself has so many
different presentations and so setting
up the right kind of behavioral plan for
someone with autism requires you
understanding
where their deficits are and what their
where their strengths are
right
and so for example one just one simple
example is like generally speaking
people with autism do better with
concrete communication
so like setting very firm limits that
are like super concrete it's not like
get good grades
like that's too abstract so you have to
be like you have to study for a minimum
of two hours a day and get scores higher
than 90.
and if you don't do that we will reduce
your gaming time by this amount
so it needs to become like a very
strict kind of behavioral plan
then i think this is where you know i
hate to say it chat but sometimes we do
help your parents set better limits on
you which i think is something that you
all appreciate over time so that we've
heard on stream as well from guests
we've heard you know
like burnt out gifted kids say yeah i
wish my parents you know were stricter
on me like i wish they forced me to
study when i was a kid so that i knew
how to study as an adult
so sometimes we really encourage hard
limit setting
and so when it comes to autism i think
as a 22 year old i just don't know how
much you're capable of because if you
guys have decided that you're not going
to seek mental health help and your dad
is basically mentally checked out and
you guys aren't going to set limits on
the kid i don't i don't know what you
can do as a 22 year old you can ask him
you can say hey like what do you think
about your gaming
it's disruptive for me
but i i think getting him to a therapist
and maybe talking to your parents about
like hey i'm worried like maybe the best
thing you can do is talk to your parents
and say hey i'm worried about my brother
like i think this is getting worse what
do you all think
and then your parents are gonna say like
yeah it's getting worse but we don't
know what to do
and that's when you can say okay so if
you don't know what to do i don't know
what to do either
generally speaking when you don't know
what to do maybe we should go consult a
professional because it's their job to
know what to do
right i don't think that he's like ill
or anything and it's not like you guys
are doing a bad job but it just feels to
me like we're outgunned in this
situation so maybe we need to get a
little bit of help
and i think if you can really win over
your parents and get them to a
professional
that'll be like the first step
you